'\" t
.\"     Title: bodhi-update-manager
.\"    Author: rbt-ylee <ylee@bodhilinux.com>
.\"      Date: 09 MAY 2026
.\"    Manual: BODHI-UPDATE-MANAGER
.\"    Source: Linux
.\"  Language: English
.\"
.TH BODHI-UPDATE-MANAGER 1 "2026-04-14" "Bodhi Linux" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
bodhi-update-manager \- graphical update manager for Debian-based systems

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bodhi-update-manager
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.RI [ DEB_FILE ...]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bodhi-update-manager
is a graphical update manager for Bodhi Linux and other Debian/Ubuntu-based
systems.

It provides a unified interface for viewing, filtering, and installing system
updates from multiple sources. Supported update sources may include APT,
Flatpak, and Snap through a backend plugin system.

The application is designed to be lightweight, modular, and extensible.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display a summary of available options and exit.

.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Display version information and exit.

.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-license
Display license information and exit.

.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-debug
Enable verbose debug logging.
Debug mode enables expanded logging output including module names, filenames,
and line numbers.

.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-tray
Start the application in tray mode.
When enabled, the main window is not shown immediately and the application
starts minimized to the system tray.

.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-security
Show only security-related updates.

.TP
.BR \-k ", " \-\-kernel
Show only kernel-related updates.

.SH DEBIAN PACKAGE INSTALLATION
One or more local Debian package files may be passed on the command line.

.PP
For example:
.PP
.nf
.B bodhi-update-manager package.deb
.fi

.PP
or:
.PP
.nf
.B bodhi-update-manager package1.deb package2.deb
.fi

.PP
If a valid package is supplied, the application launches the graphical
installation workflow.

.PP
Supplied package files are validated before installation. The application
checks that each path exists, is a regular file, uses a
.B .deb
suffix, and is recognized as a Debian binary package when MIME detection is
available.

.SH FEATURES
.IP \(bu 2
View available package updates.
.IP \(bu 2
Filter updates by category or backend.
.IP \(bu 2
Install selected updates.
.IP \(bu 2
Highlight security updates.
.IP \(bu 2
Handle held or blocked packages.
.IP \(bu 2
Support multiple update sources via backend plugins.
.IP \(bu 2
Provide systemd user timer and PolicyKit integration.

.SH BACKENDS
Updates are provided by backend plugins. Common backends include:

.TP
.B apt
Debian/Ubuntu package management via APT.

.TP
.B flatpak
Flatpak application updates, if available.

.TP
.B snap
Snap package updates, if available.

.PP
Additional backends may be installed separately.

.SH PLUGIN SYSTEM
.B bodhi-update-manager
supports dynamically discovered backend plugins via Python entry points.

.PP
Plugins must implement the defined backend interface and declare compatibility
with the supported plugin API version.

.PP
Third-party plugins may extend the application to support additional update
sources.

.SH SYSTEMD INTEGRATION
A systemd user service and timer are provided for periodic background refresh
operations.

.TP
.IP \(bu 2
.I /usr/lib/systemd/user/bodhi-update-manager-refresh.service
.sp 2
Runs background refresh operations for package metadata.

.TP
.IP \(bu 2
.I /usr/lib/systemd/user/bodhi-update-manager-refresh.timer
.sp 2
Schedules periodic refresh checks using systemd user timers.

.PP
The timer may be enabled with:
.PP
.nf
.B systemctl --user enable --now bodhi-update-manager-refresh.timer
.fi

.PP
Timer status may be inspected with:
.PP
.nf
.B systemctl --user status bodhi-update-manager-refresh.timer
.fi

.SH FILES
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/bodhi-update-manager/prefs.json

.TP
.I /usr/lib/bodhi-update-manager/
Application modules and backend implementations.

.TP
.I /usr/libexec/bodhi-update-manager-root
Internal helper used for privileged package operations.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Defines the base directory for user-specific configuration files.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful execution.

.TP
.B 1
General runtime or validation failure.

.TP
.B 2
Command-line parsing error.

.SH BUGS
Bugs may be reported via the project issue tracker:
.br
.I https://github.com/flux-abyss/bodhi-update-manager/issues

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR apt (8),
.BR apt-get (8),
.BR dpkg (1),
.BR flatpak (1),
.BR snap (1),
.BR pkexec (1),
.BR systemctl (1)

.SH AUTHORS
Joseph Wiley <flux.abyss@proton.me>
.br
Robert Wiley <ylee@bodhilinux.com>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2026 Bodhi Linux Team.

.PP
This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or, at your option, any later
version.
