'\" t
.\"     Title: bodhi-update-manager-plugins
.\"    Author: rbt-ylee <ylee@bodhilinux.com>
.\"      Date: 09 MAY 2026
.\"    Manual: BODHI-UPDATE-MANAGER
.\"    Source: Linux
.\"  Language: English
.\"
.TH BODHI-UPDATE-MANAGER-PLUGINS 7 "2026-04-09" "Bodhi Linux" "File Formats and Conventions"
.SH NAME
bodhi-update-manager-plugins \- plugin interface for bodhi-update-manager

.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B bodhi-update-manager
application supports third-party update backends through a versioned plugin
interface.

Plugins extend the application by providing additional update sources such as
alternative package managers or external systems.

Plugins are discovered dynamically using Python entry points.

.SH PLUGIN API VERSION
Plugins must declare compatibility with the supported plugin API version.

The current plugin API version is:
.TP
.B 1

Plugins declaring an incompatible API version will not be loaded.

.SH ENTRY POINTS
Plugins are registered using Python entry points under the group:
.TP
.B bodhi_update.backends

Example (pyproject.toml):
.PP
.nf
[project.entry-points."bodhi_update.backends"]
example = "example_plugin.backend:ExampleBackend"
.fi

.SH BACKEND IMPLEMENTATION
A plugin must define a backend class implementing the required interface.

The backend must:
.TP
\(bu subclass the UpdateBackend base class
.TP
\(bu provide metadata via BackendMeta
.TP
\(bu implement required methods for update discovery and installation

.SH METADATA
Each backend must define a metadata object describing its behavior.

Required fields include:
.TP
.B backend_id
Unique identifier for the backend.

.TP
.B display_name
Human-readable name.

.TP
.B API
Plugin API version.

Optional fields may include:
.TP
.B filter_group
Logical grouping used in the user interface.

.TP
.B filter_label
Label shown in the category selector.

.TP
.B filter_sort_order
Sort order for the category selector.

.TP
.B icon_name
Icon used in the update list.

.TP
.B show_in_preferences
Whether the backend appears in the Preferences dialog.

Informational fields:
.TP
.B author
Name of the plugin author.

.TP
.B homepage
Project or documentation URL.

.TP
.B version
Plugin version string.

.SH COMPATIBILITY
The plugin API is versioned.

Within a given major API version:
.TP
\(bu backward compatibility is maintained
.TP
\(bu new optional fields may be added
.TP
\(bu required interfaces will not change

Breaking changes require a new plugin API version.

.SH ERROR HANDLING
Plugins are loaded dynamically.

If a plugin:
.TP
\(bu fails to import
.TP
\(bu declares an incompatible API version
.TP
\(bu provides invalid metadata
.TP
\(bu raises exceptions during execution
it will be skipped and a warning will be logged.
.br
A failing plugin must not prevent the application from starting.

.SH SECURITY
Plugins are executed as normal Python code within the application process.

No sandboxing is provided.

Plugins must be considered \fB\fItrusted code\fR.

.SH EXAMPLE
Minimal backend plugin:
.PP
.nf
from bodhi_update.backends import UpdateBackend, BackendMeta

class ExampleBackend(UpdateBackend):
    meta = BackendMeta(
        backend_id="example",
        display_name="Example Backend",
        API="1",
    )

    def get_updates(self):
        return []

    def install_updates(self, updates):
        return True
.fi

.SH FILES
Plugins are typically installed as Python packages and discovered via entry
points.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bodhi-update-manager (1)

.SH AUTHORS
Joseph Wiley <flux.abyss@proton.me>
.br
Robert Wiley <ylee@bodhilinux.com>


.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2026 Bodhi Linux Team.

This document is free documentation; you may redistribute it under the same
terms as the GNU General Public License.
